this video is brought to you by
Squarespace this film is not about
lesbianism it's about the power of lies
to destroy people's lives this film is
not about homosexuality it's about
loneliness this film is not about
homosexuality
it's about insanity
[Music]
this film
is definitely about homosexuality the
boys in the band is a 1970 American film
directed by William friedkin of Exorcist
Fame based on the 1968 Off-Broadway play
of the same name by Mark Crowley the
film takes place in New York City in
1968 and follows a group of gay friends
who gather for a birthday party the main
character is Michael a neurotic and
self-loathing gay man who is hosting the
party for his friend Harold a flamboyant
and witty gay man as the night wears on
the guests become increasingly drunk and
confrontational leading to heated
arguments and Revelations about their
personal lives the arrival of a straight
friend Alan adds to the tension as he is
uncomfortable with the gay culture and
the open homosexuality on display as the
night progresses the character's
relationships with each other become
more complicated leading to a climactic
confrontation that exposes their
vulnerabilities and insecurities on the
strength of a classy set of New York
stage reviews and its billing as a
comedy despite its dead serious content
the boys in the band was taken for
gospel in an America populated by people
who had never met a homosexual in their
entire lives the film
was not positive but it was fair the
only heterosexual character Alan can
easily despise the Nelly Emery because
he is everything a gay is supposed to be
a butterfly in heat Alan even comes to
pity The Battered [ __ ] in the end but
what scares Alan and the audience what
they could not come to terms with or
understand is the homosexuality of Hank
and Larry who are both just as Queer as
Emery yet look just as straight as Alan
the possibility that there could be
non-stereotypical homosexuals who are
also staunch Advocates of a working gay
relationship is presented by the two
lovers throughout the film
and they are the two characters most
often ignored by critics and analysts it
is Larry who speaks of rejecting
heterosexual concepts of marriage and
creating a relationship with respect for
one another's freedoms with no need to
lie or pretend at the end of the film
Larry and Hank win a telephone Truth
game that Michael has viciously devised
when they call each other and say I love
you
it is when Larry and Hank Express
affection for each other physically and
verbally that the audience and the lone
straight party guests are most
uncomfortable in contrast Michael's
inability to deal with his own
homosexuality is exposed as old-time
movie melodrama and Harold's final
equally melodramatic speech puts it into
perspective
you're a homosexual and you don't want
to be
but there's nothing you can do to change
it
not all your prayers to your God
not all the analysis you can buy in all
the years you've got left to live
you may very well one day be able to
know a heterosexual life
if you want it desperately enough
if you pursue it with the fervor with
which you annihilate
but you'll always be homosexual as well
always Michael
always the speech encapsulated
self-hatred and reflected a generation
of gay men who were indoctrinated to
blame their problems all on their
homosexuality in the end Michael's
self-hatred and inability to function
became as archaic as Harold's habit of
putting his weed in a Band-Aid box in
the Medicine Chest so that he could
flush it down the toilet in case the
cops arrived Michael's weeping fits and
old movie Visions Shone light not on his
homosexuality but on the fallacies and
illusions of Hollywood dreams dreams
that had taught gay men that they were
not welcome in polite Society Hollywood
was not moved to change a wit by all of
this hysteria in gay drawing rooms in
Manhattan though yet boys in the band
moved gay men throughout the country the
internalized guilt and self-hatred of
eight gay men at a Manhattan birthday
party formed the best and most potent
argument for Gay Liberation ever offered
in popular media it provided actual and
personal instances of the detrimental
repercussions of what gay men learn
about themselves through media
falsehoods and the film sparked the
first public pushback by a budding gay
rights movement against Crowley's plays
accepted prejudices gay protesters did
not deny the existence of such
stereotypes but they were quick to point
out that the Viewpoint was one-sided and
the Prejudice is defined as the sole
depiction or representation of any group
of people by a minority stereotype the
boys in the band was a movie about gays
and a gay movie it was a creation born
of a subculture and reflected a harsh
reflection Society viewed it as if it
were a scientific trip but it was an
interior Journey for many gays who were
shocked by the sadness of Michael's
sickening rituals many of Crowley's
caricatures were misconceptions that
gays had accepted and even fit
themselves into since there seemed to be
no other option the audience for boys in
the band included gay people who had
grown up thinking that they were the
only gays in the world the film explored
passing and not being able to pass
loving and not being able to love and
above all else surviving in a world that
denied one's very existence but it did
so before an American public that was at
the stage of
barely being able to mention
homosexuality at all but before we
explore in more detail how homosexuality
actually started to be shown on film
let's hear a word from our sponsor this
video is brought to you by Squarespace
building a site with Squarespace is a
great way to build your brand and reach
a wider audience whether you're a visual
artist photographer a writer a video
producer or work in any creative field
it's vital to have a site that you can
use to help build your brand on your own
terms Nick and I have had a presence on
social media for a while now and
obviously this channel but using
Squarespace is incredibly intuitive and
easy to use tools we've built the James
Summerton Channel website featuring a
Blog where Nick and I write about topics
that probably wouldn't make for a full
video a special section where you can
check out preview chapters of my
upcoming novel as well as check out
Nick's novel gentlemen's club and using
squarespace's video hosting features
we're able to give you access to videos
that YouTube made us remove you can head
to squarespace.com right now for a free
trial and when you're ready to launch
your site go to squarespace.com James S
that's j-a-m-e-s-s
to save 10 off of your first purchase of
a website or domain
start showing the world how amazing you
are today with Squarespace
[Music]
foreign
within a few years of boys in the band
there was summer wishes Winter Dreams in
which Joanne Woodward's Sons
homosexuality is solely perceived in
terms of how it impacts her current
midlife crisis as yet another sign of
her failure as a wife and mother she
eventually comes to terms with it but
her son leaves for Amsterdam with a
friend and refuses to visit his parents
until they can live with him as he truly
is he makes their reluctance to
recognize him as a full person their
problem a family affair rather than his
a very natural thing the first film with
homosexual Liberation themes designed
for commercial distribution was then
released in 1973. the film investigated
the possibilities available to gay
couples on society's terms and raised
the questions how do two guys who refuse
to play society's game Define a
non-roll-based relationship while the
film was inspired by the Gay Liberation
movement it was dismissed as a trivial
soap opera by The Establishment press
and Savaged by gay liberationists for
its romantic Illusions and lack of
radical conviction David an
ex-seminarian teaches School in New York
City and settles into a monogamous
relationship with Mark a straight
identified insurance salesman in the
film the first part of the movie
examines their meeting romance Union and
split the relationship is a protracted
and planned Love Story parody in which
they go to the Opera roll in the fall
leaves in Central Park watch each other
shave in the morning and imitate every
heterosexual movie cliche about love and
marriage the can connection ends due to
Mark's reluctance to be possessed and
David's nagging fears David investigates
the Alternatives in the second half of
the film promiscuous sex and Fire Island
bath houses and orgies are as
unsatisfactory to him as his persistent
loneliness David meets Jason a divorce
photographer who helps him begin to
alter his Notions about the nature of
homosexual relationships Freedom From
The Assumption of roles in an
unstructured relationship is difficult
to depict on film in a poetic style
without inviting skepticism but the
filmmakers were aware of this and
purposefully opted to regard romance as
the bottom line as a result of the
filmmakers couching his message in such
endlessly romantic terms the picture
enraged the same people fighting for
such a political redefinition a very
natural thing had such significant
promotion and distribution issues that
it had little influence however it is
still viewed as a breakthrough film in
queer Cinema Theory classes the New York
Post described it as an argument rather
than entertainment while Judith Christ
said if the Gay Liberation movement
wants its own mediocre movie
here it is elsewhere in cinemas John
Schlesinger's Sunday Bloody Sunday was a
poignant understanding and interesting
story that has consistently been cited
since as an example of a good gay film
that failed to make it at the box office
proof that homosexuality is not a
money-making proposition in movie terms
the problem however was in the packaging
Sunday Bloody Sunday was a talky
introspective British production that
wasn't intended for a wide audience in
the United States it was noted in the
1980s that there appears to be very
little room in the American Market
anymore for the small but interesting
film according to producers and writers
this is now the specialty of Television
films interesting how history repeats
itself as small and interesting now
seems to be the Forte of streaming
services this film Schlesinger said is
not about the sexuality of these people
these movies never seem to be about the
sexuality of the people in them these
people were a gay doctor a straight
career lady and a bisexual artist with
whom they were both in love Sunday
Bloody Sunday was not about sexuality as
Schlesinger correctly said however it
was a film in which alternative
sexuality was taken for granted
something that gay activists had long
sought it was a film on human
relationships and how they do not always
correspond to our expectations of what
love should be the film portrayed a
joyful ending for a gay character whose
boring resignation is not the result of
his homosexuality in his final monologue
he informs the audience they say
it never made you happy and I said but I
am happy
apart from missing him all my life I've
been looking for somebody courageous
resourceful
he's not it
but something
we were something
but America
despised Sunday Bloody Sunday one kiss
between the men created even more
controversy than scenes of them in bed
together male male relationships were
characterized by nothing but sex yet
genuine love between men was frowned
upon in most eyes and it was the first
time on screen when a loving kiss
between two men was not intended to
shock or repulse in American Cinema it
drew gasps from Spectators and as a
result several theaters refused to book
the film at all however it provided gay
moviegoers with a mostly positive
experience even if they were the only
people in the theater aside from the
more serious gay films gays were popping
up in small roles all over Hollywood
mostly As comedic foils perhaps most
famously in Mel Brooks's The Producers
but all of this laughter was lost on the
national gay task force which issued a
set of guidelines for Studios to follow
including homosexuality isn't funny use
the same rules you have for other
minorities if bigots don't get away with
it if they hate Catholics they they
can't get away with it if they hate gays
stereotypical people do exist but if
such a minority of any group receives
exclusive media exposure
that is bigotry hmm
television which is subject to the
regulation of the FCC and to the
reaction of its advertisers to vocal
public opinion was more vulnerable to
this type of activist pressure than was
the motion picture industry television
programming which aired nearly 24 hours
a day was always in need of societal
concerns to address
homosexuality being one of them a film
must be a success but if a television
show fails there is always next week and
another subject to try therefore
experimentation was encouraged pressure
from Gay Liberation influenced
television's approach to portraying
homosexuality for the American audience
and it was successful in achieving a
more balanced and surely more prolific
discourse on television than in film
Archie Bunker Norman lear's Charming
bigot first encountered homosexuality in
1972 when he realized that one of his
drinking buddies a former football star
was gay
how long you know me
10 12 years yeah
in all that time did I ever mention a
woman
but what difference does that make you a
bachelor so
I know but pastors there they're always
acting kind of private exactly
oh come on
watching from the White House President
Nixon declared it distasteful
because it made a good man look like a
fool it is unclear if Nixon was talking
about Archie Bunker or the football
player that same year ABC made a
significant step forward in the
portrayal of ordinary gay men on
television that certain summer a
two-hour movie of the week presented the
story of a divorced dad who chooses to
tell his 14 year old son that he is gay
when his son arrives for a weekend visit
when the father eventually gets around
to describing the issue to his son the
boy rushes away unable to deal with it
for gay liberationists The Narrative was
a little too soft while it earned
glowing reviews in the mainstream press
several gay writers criticize it for
being too hesitant and unduly cautious
but with the critical success of that
certain summer the barriers seemed to
come crashing down for television by the
mid-1970s queer characters had appeared
on virtually every sitcom drama and talk
show in prime time TV All in the Family
Rhoda mod Barney Miller Mash The Bob
Newhart Show and scores of others
featured gay characters the naked civil
servant and the war Widow two
spectacular television dramas were
uplifting depictions of the lives of
lgbtq people both real and fictitious
both series instilled in its key
characters a sense of history and their
position as strugglers for sexual
Freedom both shows revealed a hidden
aspect of the gay experience through
romance and humor although Quentin
crisp's story in the naked civil servant
was not a gay liberationist's Dream by
any means gays greatly admired and
respected crisp's defiant lifestyle when
you're being followed there are a number
of rules to obey
never look back
[Applause]
on no account run
gradually increase the pace to five
miles an hour
[Music]
if this does not deter him
do not stop until forcibly stopped so
stand still and look at him it may work
Studio Do You Think You Are
be very polite
it may work
no one really
sir offer money it may work yet no gay
Heroes emerged on the movie screen at
least not until the release of Dog Day
Afternoon the film directed by Sydney
lament and starring Al Pacino is a
complex and nuanced exploration of the
queer experience set during a bank
robbery gone awry in Brooklyn the film
tells the story of Sunny a man who Robs
a Bank in order to pay for Leon's
Sunny's Partners gender confirmation
surgery Leon isn't given a feminine name
in the movie FYI as the story unfolds we
learn more about sunny and Leon's
relationship we discover that Leon is a
pre-op trans woman and sunny is willing
to do whatever it takes to support her
including robbing a bank to fund the
procedure this is a powerful statement
about the lengths that queer people will
go to in order to support and care for
one another especially in a society that
is often hostile and unwelcoming the
film also explores the impact of queer
identity on the character's
relationships with their families when
Sonny's mother comes to the bank to try
and talk him out of the robbery he
reveals to her that Leon is a trans
woman
her reaction is one of shock and disgust
another important queer theme in Dog Day
Afternoon is the way that Sunny
sexuality and gender identity intersect
with his working class background
throughout the film we see Sunny
interacting with other members of his
community including his friends and the
police officers who are trying to
negotiate with him his working class
background is an important part of his
identity and it's clear that he feels a
sense of loyalty and connection to his
community something not often seen among
queer characters who were usually
artists or working in fields of high
esteem like universities made for a
budget of 3.5 million dollars it went on
to gross 56 million dollars at the box
office or 381 million dollars when
adjusted for inflation and was nominated
for six Oscars including best picture
bursting the bubble of the assumption
that movies with queer characters and
themes can't succeed but Al Pacino
returned to gay Cinema five years later
with cruising which
did not go over so well cruising was
based on a 1970 novel by the New York
Times editor Gerald Walker that
portrayed the process by which a New
York city policeman assigned to capture
a psychotic killer of gay men becomes
aware of his own homosexuality and then
commences killing gay men the gay
characters in the novel are all filled
with self-hatred and hatred for the
people who turned them gay the blame
usually falls on the first man with whom
they had sex the killer Intimates that
the homosexual lifestyle is an
inherently violent one the killer in the
film adaptation knifes his victims to
death during or immediately following
sex and the film opens with a shot of a
gangrenous severed arm floating in the
Hudson River Al Pacino's character a cop
immerses himself in the underground of
heavy leather and sadomasochism as the
film goes on he becomes agitated and
Restless a state brought about by his
own sexual identity crisis though his
motives are never explored or explained
when he finally locates the killer he
stabs him which puts the killer in the
hospital under police custody Pacino's
assignment is over
however
another murder follows
this time that of Pacino's gay next door
neighbor who was the only relatively
happy gay character in the movie it is
implied in the end that Pacino himself
had committed this final murder and the
film ends with him gazing at himself in
a mirror in a statement to the press the
director screenwriter William friedkin
of boys in the band said that he was not
sure who the real murderer was and that
furthermore he did not consider the
murderer to be homosexual a more likely
conclusion is that friedkin deliberately
obscured the identity of the killer
either consciously or unconsciously as a
response so the wave of protests that
arose in the summer of 1979 when he
began filming gays who protested the
making of the film maintained that it
would show that when Pacino recognized
his attraction to the homosexual world
he would become psychotic and begin to
kill so freedkin avoided that situation
by leaving the ending of the film
relatively ambiguous yet friedkin
realized that his film said what gay
activists claimed it said and he had a
disclaimer to all Prince of the film
this film is not intended as an
indictment of the homosexual world
it is set in one small segment of that
world which is not meant to be
representative of the whole gay
audiences around this time began to see
that Hollywood was willing to overlook
successful queer films but would admire
themselves in their failures the most
insightful and important films were
those which had been made in struggle by
small groups of people and against
tremendous odds the producers and
directors of the British film Nighthawks
spent five years preparing and Gathering
funds for their film about a gay teacher
who spends his nights cruising in bars
and discos and having one-night stands
Nighthawks offers an almost documentary
style look into the evening cityscape of
the ritualistic life of a man who is
becoming aware that he lives two lives
the dispassionate view of London gay
nightlife allows a gay male audience to
experience the hunt as more than a
passive spectator there is an uncanny
feeling that each member of the audience
is himself cruising recognizing a look a
gesture a glance then realizing it is
meant for the character in the film
through whose eyes we are looking no
slick and Sensational Hollywood Peep
Show Nighthawks is a perceptive film
with modest intentions and it succeeded
without compromising its scope for
commercial reasons while William
friedkin was on New York streets filming
the blood and guts Hollywood version of
the gay underground Nighthawks opened in
New York and got what turned out to be
better reviews than cruising would get
six months later and some queer
filmmakers were willing not just a step
outside of the Hollywood System
but [ __ ] all over it John Waters became
synonymous with the queer underground
Cinema movement of the 1970s thanks to
his outrageous and subversive style
Waters films are known for their
irreverent humor over the top characters
and outrageous subject matter he has
always been drawn to the marginalized
and the taboo and his films often
explore themes of sexuality gender and
identity many of his films feature queer
characters and he has been credited with
helping to break down barriers and
challenge stereotypes about queer people
especially the messy ones and we love a
messy queer waters's film female trouble
released in 1974 is a classic example of
his queer Cinema the film follows the
story of Don Davenport played by the
Divine Divine who is a rebellious
teenager with a troubled home life she
runs away from home and becomes involved
in a series of crimes ultimately leading
to her downfall the film features a cast
of characters that includes drag queens
sex workers and other Outsiders who
challenge societal Norms of gender and
sexuality another notable film in waters
Canon is desperate living the film takes
place in a fictional town called
mortville where the residents are all
social outcasts and deviants the film
features a cast of characters that
includes a lesbian couple a transgender
woman and a group of militant feminists
the film is a
dark comedy that explores themes of
power privilege and oppression and most
iconically
there's Pink Flamingos the queerness of
this film is evident in the way it
portrays its characters and its themes
and it remains a potent example of the
power of queer Cinema to disrupt and
subvert
all expectations Gentlemen of the press
get ready cause you are about to witness
the biggest news event of the year live
homicide one of the most striking
aspects of Pink Flamingos is the way it
portrays its Central character Divine is
a larger than life figure both in terms
of her physical appearance and her
personality she is a force of nature
unapologetically embracing her own
queerness and challenging anyone who
tries to limit or control her her
sexuality is fluid and she engages in
relationships with both men and women
throughout the film in addition to its
portrayal of queer characters Pink
Flamingos also explores themes that are
Central to the queer experience the
film's focus on Outsiders and those who
are marginalized by mainstream Society
is a recurring theme throughout with
characters like Divine and her cohorts
living on the fringes of society and
rejecting traditional norms
at the same time Pink Flamingos is also
a celebration of queer culture and a
testament to the power of queer
resilience despite the violence and
degradation they face Divine and her
cohorts remain defiant refusing to be
cowed by the oppressive forces of
society their queerness is a source of
strength and a way of connecting with
others who share their experiences
creating a sense of community and
belonging in the face of adversity
content warning though Waters films are
also notable for their celebration of
Camp a style that Embraces theatricality
and excess water's influence on the
world of film and popular culture is
undeniable he has inspired countless
artists and filmmakers and his work has
been celebrated for its subversive and
irreverent humor his films have also
helped to pave the way for a greater
representation of queer characters and
stories in mainstream media by
challenging societal norms and pushing
boundaries Waters has left an indelible
mark on the world of Cinema and Beyond
these queer Underground round films
opened the minds of many who wanted
nothing to do with queer people
throughout the 1970s we continued to
appear on some of the most popular TV
shows in the world such as Dallas and
mash and in 1979 came the groundbreaking
documentary before Stonewall the
documentary combines archival footage
interviews with queer activists and
Scholars and personal accounts to
Chronicle the history of the queer
community in America it highlights the
experiences of queer people in different
regions of the country and in various
spheres of society including the Arts
politics and even Sports one of the
documentary's key strengths is its
emphasis on diversity in the queer
Community the film showcases the lives
of people like Bayard Rustin a gay
African-American civil rights leader who
worked with Martin Luther King and
Sylvia Rivera a transgender activist who
played a significant role in The
Stonewall riots film and television were
now being used to show the world that we
were people
complex and diverse and with a burgeon
and queer political power structure
rising up in California New York and DC
as well as a crop of new gay filmmakers
beginning to be noticed by Hollywood it
seemed like we were ready to tear down
those closet doors for good and in the
summer of 1981 pre-production had even
begun on making love a major Studio film
from 20th Century Fox about a married
man coming to terms with his
homosexuality and the love triangle that
develops between him his wife and
another man but in that same summer
a rare cancer began appearing in gay men
followed by a cluster of pneumocystis
pneumonia cases in San Francisco and New
York
and then gay men across the world
began dying
and suddenly
Hollywood's opinion of us
didn't matter so much